Native ZFS for Linux
Produced at Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory
Ported by Brian Behlendorf <behlendorf1@llnl.gov>
LLNL-CODE-403049.

The majority of the code in the Native ZFS for Linux port comes from OpenSolaris which has been released under the terms of the "CDDL":http://hub.opensolaris.org/bin/view/Main/opensolaris_license open source license.  This includes the core ZFS code, libavl, libnvpair, libefi, libunicode, and libutil.  The original OpenSolaris source can be downloaded from:

"http://dlc.sun.com/osol/on/downloads/b*/on-src.tar.bz2":http://dlc.sun.com/osol/on/downloads/

Files which do not originate from OpenSolaris are noted in the file header and attributed properly.  These exceptions include, but are not limited to, the vdev_disk.c and zvol.c implementation which are licensed under the "CDDL":http://hub.opensolaris.org/bin/view/Main/opensolaris_license.

The zpios test code is originally derived from the Lustre pios test code which is licensed under the "GPL":http://www.gnu.org/licenses/gpl.html.  As such the heavily modified zpios kernel test code also remains licensed under the "GPL":http://www.gnu.org/licenses/gpl.html.

The latest stable and development versions of the Native ZFS for Linux port can be downloaded from the official site:

"http://github.com/behlendorf/zfs/":http://github.com/behlendorf/zfs/

This ZFS on Linux port was produced at the Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory (LLNL) under Contract No. DE-AC52-07NA27344 (Contract 44) between the U.S. Department of Energy (DOE) and Lawrence Livermore National Security, LLC (LLNS) for the operation of LLNL.  It has been approved for release under LLNL-CODE-403049.

This work was prepared as an account of work sponsored by an agency of the United States Government.  Neither the United States Government nor Lawrence Livermore National Security, LLC nor any of their employees, makes any warranty, express or implied, or assumes any liability or responsibility for the accuracy, completeness, or usefulness of any information, apparatus, product, or process disclosed, or represents that its use would not infringe privately-owned rights.

Reference herein to any specific commercial products, process, or services by trade name, trademark, manufacturer or otherwise does
not necessarily constitute or imply its endorsement, recommendation, or favoring by the United States Government or Lawrence Livermore National Security, LLC.  The views and opinions of authors expressed herein do not necessarily state or reflect those of the Untied States Government or Lawrence Livermore National Security, LLC, and shall not be used for advertising or product endorsement purposes.

Unless otherwise noted, all files in this distribution are released under the Common Development and Distribution License (CDDL). Exceptions are noted within the associated source files.  See the file "OPENSOLARIS.LICENSE":http://hub.opensolaris.org/bin/view/Main/opensolaris_license for more information.