Home.md, before:

<p align="center"><img src="http://zfsonlinux.org/images/zfs-linux.png"/></p>

Welcome to **ZFS on Linux** - the official [OpenZFS][openzfs] implementation
for Linux.

This wiki is the main source of documentation for users and developers working
with (or contributing to) the ZFS on Linux project.  New users or system
administrators should refer to the documentation for their favorite distribution
to get started.

| [[Getting Started]]          | [[Project and Community]]     | [[Developer Resources]] |
|------------------------------|-------------------------------|------------------------ |
| How to get started with OpenZFS on your favorite Linux distribution | About the project and how to contribute | Technical documentation discussing the OpenZFS implementation |

Platform agnostic [[Performance tuning|http://open-zfs.org/wiki/Performance_tuning]] information is maintained at the OpenZFS wiki. [[Hardware advice|http://open-zfs.org/wiki/Hardware]] is also maintained at the OpenZFS wiki.

[website]: http://zfsonlinux.org
[openzfs]: http://open-zfs.org

Commit message:

added note to reference sidebar for Linux-specific info

Home.md, after:

<p align="center"><img src="http://zfsonlinux.org/images/zfs-linux.png"/></p>

Welcome to **ZFS on Linux** - the official [OpenZFS][openzfs] implementation
for Linux.

This wiki is the main source of documentation for users and developers working
with (or contributing to) the ZFS on Linux project.  New users or system
administrators should refer to the documentation for their favorite distribution
to get started.

| [[Getting Started]]          | [[Project and Community]]     | [[Developer Resources]] |
|------------------------------|-------------------------------|------------------------ |
| How to get started with OpenZFS on your favorite Linux distribution | About the project and how to contribute | Technical documentation discussing the OpenZFS implementation |

Linux-specific performance and tuning links are in the sidebar. More generic and platform agnostic [[Performance tuning|http://open-zfs.org/wiki/Performance_tuning]] information is maintained at the OpenZFS wiki. [[Hardware advice|http://open-zfs.org/wiki/Hardware]] is also maintained at the OpenZFS wiki.

[website]: http://zfsonlinux.org
[openzfs]: http://open-zfs.org
