Ubuntu-16.04-Root-on-ZFS.md, before:

### Caution
* This HOWTO uses a whole physical disk.
* Do not use these instructions for dual-booting.
* Backup your data. Any existing data will be lost.

### System Requirements
* [64-bit Ubuntu 16.04 Xenial Live CD](http://releases.ubuntu.com/16.04/ubuntu-16.04-desktop-amd64.iso) (*not* the alternate installer)
* 64-bit computer (amd64, a.k.a. x86_64) computer
* A drive which presents 512B logical sectors.  Installing on a drive which presents 4KiB logical sectors (a “4Kn” drive) should work with UEFI partitioning, but this has not been tested.

Computers that have less than 2 GiB of memory run ZFS slowly.  4 GiB of memory is recommended for normal performance in basic workloads.  If you wish to use deduplication, you will need [massive amounts of RAM](http://wiki.freebsd.org/ZFSTuningGuide#Deduplication). Enabling deduplication is a permanent change that cannot be easily reverted.

## Step 1: Prepare The Install Environment

1.1  Boot the Ubuntu Live CD, select Try Linux, and open a terminal (press Ctrl-Alt-T).

1.2  Setup and update the repositories:

    $ sudo apt-add-repository universe
    $ sudo apt update

1.3  Optional: Install the OpenSSH server in the Live CD environment:

If you have a second system, using SSH to access the target system can be convenient.

    $ passwd
    $ sudo apt --yes install openssh-server

**Hint:** You can find your IP address with `ip addr show scope global`.  Then, from your main machine, connect with `ssh ubuntu@IP`.

1.4  Become root:

    $ sudo -i

1.5  Install ZFS in the Live CD environment:

    # apt install --yes debootstrap gdisk zfs-initramfs

**Note:** You can ignore the two error lines about "AppStream".  They are harmless.

## Step 2: Disk Formatting

2.1  If you are re-using any disks which were previously in an MD array, zero the MD superblock now to avoid corruption if MD were to try to assemble the old array.

    # mdadm --zero-superblock --force /dev/disk/by-id/scsi-SATA_disk1

2.2  Partition your disk:

    Run this if you need legacy (BIOS) booting:
    # sgdisk -a1 -n2:34:2047  -t2:EF02 /dev/disk/by-id/scsi-SATA_disk1

    Run this for UEFI booting (for use now or in the future):
    # sgdisk     -n3:1M:+512M -t3:EF00 /dev/disk/by-id/scsi-SATA_disk1

    Run these in all cases:
    # sgdisk     -n9:-8M:0    -t9:BF07 /dev/disk/by-id/scsi-SATA_disk1
    # sgdisk     -n1:0:0      -t1:BF01 /dev/disk/by-id/scsi-SATA_disk1

Always use the long `/dev/disk/by-id/*` aliases with ZFS.  Using the `/dev/sd*` device nodes directly can cause sporadic import failures, especially on systems that have more than one storage pool.

**Hints:**
* `ls -la /dev/disk/by-id` will list the aliases.
* Are you doing this in a virtual machine? If your virtual disk is missing from `/dev/disk/by-id`, use `/dev/vda` if you are using KVM with virtio; otherwise, read the [troubleshooting](https://github.com/rlaager/zfs/wiki/HOWTO-Install-Ubuntu-to-a-Native-ZFS-Root-Filesystem#troubleshooting) section.

2.3  Create the root pool:

    # zpool create -o ashift=12 \
          -O atime=off -O canmount=off -O compression=lz4 -O normalization=formD \
          -O mountpoint=/ -R /mnt \
          rpool /dev/disk/by-id/scsi-SATA_disk1-part1

**Notes:**
* The use of `ashift=12` is recommended here because many drives today have 4KiB (or larger) physical sectors, even though they present 512B logical sectors.  Also, a future replacement drive may have 4KiB physical sectors (in which case `ashift=12` is desirable) or 4KiB logical sectors (in which case `ashift=12` is required).
* Setting `normalization=formD` eliminates some corner cases relating to UTF-8 filename normalization. It also implies `utf8only=on`, which means that only UTF-8 filenames are allowed. If you care to support non-UTF-8 filenames, do not use this option. For a discussion of why requiring UTF-8 filenames may be a bad idea, see [The problems with enforced UTF-8 only filenames](http://utcc.utoronto.ca/~cks/space/blog/linux/ForcedUTF8Filenames).

**Hints:**
* The root pool does not have to be a single disk; it can have a mirror or raidz topology.  In that case, repeat the partitioning commands for all the disks which will be part of the pool. Then, create the pool using `zpool create ... rpool mirror /dev/disk/by-id/scsi-SATA_disk1-part1 /dev/disk/by-id/scsi-SATA_disk2-part1` (or replace `mirror` with `raidz`, `raidz2`, or `raidz3` and list the partitions from additional disks). Later, install GRUB to all the disks. This is trivial for MBR booting; the UEFI equivalent is currently left as an exercise for the reader.
* The pool name is arbitrary.  On systems that can automatically install to ZFS, the root pool is named `rpool` by default.  If you work with multiple systems, it might be wise to use `hostname`, `hostname0`, or `hostname-1` instead.

## Step 3: System Installation

3.1  Create a filesystem dataset to act as a container:

    # zfs create -o canmount=off -o mountpoint=none rpool/ROOT

On Solaris systems, the root filesystem is cloned and the suffix is incremented for major system changes through `pkg image-update` or `beadm`. Similar functionality for APT is possible but currently unimplemented. Even without such a tool, it can still be used for manually created clones.

3.2  Create a filesystem dataset for the root filesystem of the Ubuntu system:

    # zfs create -o canmount=noauto -o mountpoint=/ rpool/ROOT/ubuntu
    # zfs mount rpool/ROOT/ubuntu

With ZFS, it is not normally necessary to use a mount command (either `mount` or `zfs mount`). This situation is an exception because of `canmount=noauto`.

3.3  Create datasets:

    # zfs create                 -o setuid=off              rpool/home
    # zfs create -o mountpoint=/root                        rpool/home/root
    # zfs create -o canmount=off -o setuid=off  -o exec=off rpool/var
    # zfs create -o com.sun:auto-snapshot=false             rpool/var/cache
    # zfs create                                            rpool/var/log
    # zfs create                                            rpool/var/spool
    # zfs create -o com.sun:auto-snapshot=false -o exec=on  rpool/var/tmp

    If you use /srv on this system:
    # zfs create                                            rpool/srv

    If this system will have games installed:
    # zfs create                                            rpool/var/games

    If this system will store local email in /var/mail:
    # zfs create                                            rpool/var/mail

    If this system will use NFS (locking):
    # zfs create -o com.sun:auto-snapshot=false \
                 -o mountpoint=/var/lib/nfs                 rpool/var/nfs

The primary goal of this dataset layout is to separate the OS (at `rpool/ROOT/ubuntu`) from user data. This allows the root filesystem to be rolled back without rolling back user data such as logs (in `/var/log`). This will be especially important if/when a `beadm` or similar utility is integrated. Since we are creating multiple datasets anyway, it is trivial to add some restrictions (for extra security) at the same time. The `com.sun.auto-snapshot` setting is used by some ZFS snapshot utilities to exclude transient data.

3.4  Install the minimal system:

    # chmod 1777 /mnt/var/tmp
    # debootstrap xenial /mnt
    # zfs set devices=off rpool

The `debootstrap` command leaves the new system in an unconfigured state.  An alternative to using `debootstrap` is to copy the entirety of a working Ubuntu system into the new ZFS root.

## Step 4: System Configuration

4.1  Configure the hostname (change `HOSTNAME` to the desired hostname).

    # echo HOSTNAME > /mnt/etc/hostname

    # vi /mnt/etc/hosts
    Add a line:
    127.0.1.1       HOSTNAME
    or if the system has a real name in DNS:
    127.0.1.1       FQDN HOSTNAME

**Hint:** Use `nano` if you find `vi` confusing.

4.2  Configure the network interface:

    Find the interface name:
    # ifconfig -a

    # vi /mnt/etc/network/interfaces.d/NAME
    auto NAME
    iface NAME inet dhcp

Customize this file if the system is not a DHCP client.

4.3  Bind the virtual filesystems from the LiveCD environment to the new system and `chroot` into it:

    # mount --rbind /dev  /mnt/dev
    # mount --rbind /proc /mnt/proc
    # mount --rbind /sys  /mnt/sys
    # chroot /mnt /bin/bash --login

**Note:** This is using `--rbind`, not `--bind`.

4.4 Configure a basic system environment:

    # locale-gen en_US.UTF-8

Even if you prefer a non-English system language, always ensure that `en_US.UTF-8` is available.

    # echo 'LANG="en_US.UTF-8"' > /etc/default/locale

    # dpkg-reconfigure tzdata

    # vi /etc/apt/sources.list
    deb http://archive.ubuntu.com/ubuntu xenial main universe
    deb-src http://archive.ubuntu.com/ubuntu xenial main universe

    deb http://security.ubuntu.com/ubuntu xenial-security main universe
    deb-src http://security.ubuntu.com/ubuntu xenial-security main universe

    deb http://archive.ubuntu.com/ubuntu xenial-updates main universe
    deb-src http://archive.ubuntu.com/ubuntu xenial-updates main universe

    # ln -s /proc/self/mounts /etc/mtab
    # apt update
    # apt install --yes ubuntu-minimal

4.5  Install ZFS in the chroot environment for the new system:

    # apt install --yes --no-install-recommends linux-image-generic
    # apt install --yes zfs-initramfs

4.6  Install GRUB

Choose one of the following options:

4.6a  Install GRUB for legacy (MBR) booting

    # apt install --yes grub-pc

4.6b  Install GRUB for UEFI booting

    # apt install dosfstools
    # mkdosfs -F 32 -n EFI /dev/disk/by-id/scsi-SATA_disk1-part3
    # mkdir /boot/efi
    # echo PARTUUID=$(blkid -s PARTUUID -o value \
          /dev/disk/by-id/scsi-SATA_disk1-part3) \
          /boot/efi vfat defaults 0 1 >> /etc/fstab
    # mount /boot/efi
    # apt install --yes grub-efi-amd64

4.7  Setup system groups:

    # addgroup --system lpadmin
    # addgroup --system sambashare

4.8  Set a root password

    # passwd

## Step 5: GRUB Installation

5.1  Verify that the ZFS root filesystem is recognized:

    # grub-probe /
    zfs

5.2  Refresh the initrd files:

    # update-initramfs -c -k all
    update-initramfs: Generating /boot/initrd.img-4.4.0-21-generic

5.3  Optional (but highly recommended): Make debugging GRUB easier:

    # vi /etc/default/grub
    Comment out: GRUB_HIDDEN_TIMEOUT=0
    Remove quiet and splash from: GRUB_CMDLINE_LINUX_DEFAULT
    Uncomment: GRUB_TERMINAL=console
    Save and quit.

Later, once the system has rebooted twice and you are sure everything is working, you can undo these changes, if desired.

5.4  Update the boot configuration:

    # update-grub
    Generating grub configuration file ...
    Found linux image: /boot/vmlinuz-4.4.0-21-generic
    Found initrd image: /boot/initrd.img-4.4.0-21-generic
    done

5.5  Install the boot loader

5.5a  For legacy (MBR) booting, install GRUB to the MBR:

    # grub-install /dev/disk/by-id/scsi-SATA_disk1
    Installing for i386-pc platform.
    Installation finished. No error reported.

Do not reboot the computer until you get exactly that result message. Note that you are installing GRUB to the whole disk, not a partition.

If you are creating a mirror, repeat the grub-install command for each disk in the pool.

5.5b  For UEFI booting, install GRUB:

    # grub-install --target=x86_64-efi --efi-directory=/boot/efi \
          --bootloader-id=ubuntu --recheck --no-floppy

5.6  Verify that the ZFS module is installed:

    # ls /boot/grub/*/zfs.mod

## Step 6: First Boot

6.1  Snapshot the initial installation:

    # zfs snapshot rpool/ROOT/ubuntu@install

In the future, you will likely want to take snapshots before each upgrade, and remove old snapshots (including this one) at some point to save space.

6.2  Exit from the `chroot` environment back to the LiveCD environment:

    # exit

6.3  Run these commands in the LiveCD environment to unmount all filesystems:

    # mount | grep -v zfs | tac | awk '/\/mnt/ {print $3}' | xargs -i{} umount -lf {}
    # zpool export rpool

6.4  Reboot:

    # reboot

6.5  Wait for the newly installed system to boot normally. Login as root.

6.6  Create a user account:

Choose one of the following options:

6.6a  Create an unencrypted (regular) home directory:

    # zfs create rpool/home/YOURUSERNAME
    # adduser YOURUSERNAME
    # cp -a /etc/skel/.[!.]* /home/YOURUSERNAME
    # chown -R YOURUSERNAME:YOURUSERNAME /home/YOURUSERNAME

6.6b  Create an encrypted home directory:

    # apt install ecryptfs-utils

    # zfs create -o compression=off -o mountpoint=/home/.ecryptfs/YOURUSERNAME \
          rpool/home/temp-YOURUSERNAME
    # adduser --encrypt-home YOURUSERNAME
    # zfs rename rpool/home/temp-YOURUSERNAME rpool/home/YOURUSERNAME

The temporary name for the dataset is required to work-around [a bug in ecryptfs-setup-private](https://bugs.launchpad.net/ubuntu/+source/ecryptfs-utils/+bug/1574174).  Otherwise, it will fail with an error saying the home directory is already mounted; that check is not specific enough in the pattern it uses.

**Note:** Automatically mounted snapshots (i.e. the `.zfs/snapshots` directory) will not work through eCryptfs.  You can do another eCryptfs mount manually if you need to access files in a snapshot.  A script to automate the mounting should be possible, but has not yet been implemented.

6.7  Add your user account to the default set of groups for an administrator:

    # usermod -a -G adm,cdrom,dip,lpadmin,plugdev,sambashare,sudo YOURUSERNAME

## Step 7: Configure Swap

7.1  Create a volume dataset (zvol) for use as a swap device:

    # zfs create -V 4G -b $(getconf PAGESIZE) -o compression=zle \
          -o logbias=throughput -o sync=always \
          -o primarycache=metadata -o secondarycache=none \
          -o com.sun:auto-snapshot=false rpool/swap

You can adjust the size (the `4G` part) to your needs.

The compression algorithm is set to `zle` because it is the cheapest available algorithm.  As this guide recommends `ashift=12` (4 kiB blocks on disk), the common case of a 4 kiB page size means that no compression algorithm can reduce I/O.  The exception is all-zero pages, which are dropped by ZFS; but some form of compression has to be enabled to get this behavior.

7.2  Configure the swap device:

Choose one of the following options.  If you are going to do an encrypted home directory later, you should use encrypted swap.

7.2a  Create an unencrypted (regular) swap device:

**Caution**: Always use long `/dev/zvol` aliases in configuration files. Never use a short `/dev/zdX` device name.

    # mkswap -f /dev/zvol/rpool/swap
    # echo /dev/zvol/rpool/swap none swap defaults 0 0 >> /etc/fstab

7.2b  Create an encrypted swap device:

    # echo cryptswap1 /dev/zvol/rpool/swap /dev/urandom \
          swap,cipher=aes-xts-plain64:sha256,size=256 >> /etc/crypttab
    # systemctl daemon-reload
    # systemctl start systemd-cryptsetup@cryptswap1.service
    # echo /dev/mapper/cryptswap1 none swap defaults 0 0 >> /etc/fstab

7.3  Enable the swap device:

    # swapon -av

## Step 8: Full Software Installation

8.1  Upgrade the minimal system:

    # apt dist-upgrade --yes

8.2  Install a regular set of software:

Choose one of the following options:

8.2a  Install a command-line environment only:

    # apt install --yes ubuntu-standard

8.2b  Install a full GUI environment:

    # apt install --yes ubuntu-desktop

**Hint**: If you are installing a full GUI environment, you will likely want to manage your network with NetworkManager. In that case, `rm /etc/network/interfaces.d/eth0`.

8.3  Optional: Disable log compression:

As `/var/log` is already compressed by ZFS, logrotate’s compression is going to burn CPU and disk I/O for (in most cases) very little gain.  Also, if you are making snapshots of `/var/log`, logrotate’s compression will actually waste space, as the uncompressed data will live on in the snapshot.  You can edit the files in `/etc/logrotate.d` by hand to comment out `compress`, or use this loop (copy-and-paste highly recommended):

    # for file in /etc/logrotate.d/* ; do
        if grep -Eq "(^|[^#y])compress" "$file" ; then
            sed -i -r "s/(^|[^#y])(compress)/\1#\2/" "$file"
        fi
    done

8.4  Reboot:

    # reboot

### Step 9: Final Cleanup

9.1  Wait for the system to boot normally. Login using the account you created. Ensure the system (including networking) works normally.

9.2  Optional: Delete the snapshot of the initial installation:

    $ sudo zfs destroy rpool/ROOT/ubuntu@install

9.3  Optional: Disable the root password

    $ sudo usermod -p '*' root

9.4  Optional (not recommended):

If you prefer the graphical boot process, you can re-enable it now. It will make debugging boot problems more difficult, though.

    $ sudo vi /etc/default/grub
    Uncomment GRUB_HIDDEN_TIMEOUT=0
    Add quiet and splash to GRUB_CMDLINE_LINUX_DEFAULT
    Comment out GRUB_TERMINAL=console
    Save and quit.

    $ sudo update-grub

## Troubleshooting

### MPT2SAS

Most problem reports for this tutorial involve `mpt2sas` hardware that does slow asynchronous drive initialization, like some IBM M1015 or OEM-branded cards that have been flashed to the reference LSI firmware.

The basic problem is that disks on these controllers are not visible to the Linux kernel until after the regular system is started, and ZoL does not hotplug pool members.  See https://github.com/zfsonlinux/zfs/issues/330.

Most LSI cards are perfectly compatible with ZoL. If your card has this glitch, try setting rootdelay=X in GRUB_CMDLINE_LINUX. The system will wait up to X seconds for all drives to appear before importing the pool.

### Areca

Systems that require the `arcsas` blob driver should add it to the `/etc/initramfs-tools/modules` file and run `update-initramfs -c -k all`.

Upgrade or downgrade the Areca driver if something like `RIP: 0010:[<ffffffff8101b316>]  [<ffffffff8101b316>] native_read_tsc+0x6/0x20` appears anywhere in kernel log.  ZoL is unstable on systems that emit this error message.

### VMware

* Set `disk.EnableUUID = "TRUE"` in the vmx file or vsphere configuration.  Doing this ensures that `/dev/disk` aliases are created in the guest.

### QEMU/KVM/XEN

Set a unique serial number on each virtual disk (e.g.: `-drive if=none,id=disk1,file=disk1.qcow2,serial=1234567890`).

To be able to use UEFI in guests (instead of only BIOS booting):

    $ sudo apt install ovmf
    $ sudo vi /etc/libvirt/qemu.conf
    Uncomment this line:
    nvram = [ "/usr/share/OVMF/OVMF_CODE.fd:/usr/share/OVMF/OVMF_VARS.fd" ]
    $ sudo service libvirt-bin restart

Commit message:

Ubuntu: Add note about reporting bugs
Hopefully this will funnel the bugs to me faster.

Ubuntu-16.04-Root-on-ZFS.md, after:

### Caution
* This HOWTO uses a whole physical disk.
* Do not use these instructions for dual-booting.
* Backup your data. Any existing data will be lost.

### System Requirements
* [64-bit Ubuntu 16.04 Xenial Live CD](http://releases.ubuntu.com/16.04/ubuntu-16.04-desktop-amd64.iso) (*not* the alternate installer)
* 64-bit computer (amd64, a.k.a. x86_64) computer
* A drive which presents 512B logical sectors.  Installing on a drive which presents 4KiB logical sectors (a “4Kn” drive) should work with UEFI partitioning, but this has not been tested.

Computers that have less than 2 GiB of memory run ZFS slowly.  4 GiB of memory is recommended for normal performance in basic workloads.  If you wish to use deduplication, you will need [massive amounts of RAM](http://wiki.freebsd.org/ZFSTuningGuide#Deduplication). Enabling deduplication is a permanent change that cannot be easily reverted.

## Reporting Bugs

If you have bugs or feature requests related to this HOWTO, please [file a new issue](https://github.com/zfsonlinux/zfs/issues/new) and mention @rlaager.

## Step 1: Prepare The Install Environment

1.1  Boot the Ubuntu Live CD, select Try Linux, and open a terminal (press Ctrl-Alt-T).

1.2  Setup and update the repositories:

    $ sudo apt-add-repository universe
    $ sudo apt update

1.3  Optional: Install the OpenSSH server in the Live CD environment:

If you have a second system, using SSH to access the target system can be convenient.

    $ passwd
    $ sudo apt --yes install openssh-server

**Hint:** You can find your IP address with `ip addr show scope global`.  Then, from your main machine, connect with `ssh ubuntu@IP`.

1.4  Become root:

    $ sudo -i

1.5  Install ZFS in the Live CD environment:

    # apt install --yes debootstrap gdisk zfs-initramfs

**Note:** You can ignore the two error lines about "AppStream".  They are harmless.

## Step 2: Disk Formatting

2.1  If you are re-using any disks which were previously in an MD array, zero the MD superblock now to avoid corruption if MD were to try to assemble the old array.

    # mdadm --zero-superblock --force /dev/disk/by-id/scsi-SATA_disk1

2.2  Partition your disk:

    Run this if you need legacy (BIOS) booting:
    # sgdisk -a1 -n2:34:2047  -t2:EF02 /dev/disk/by-id/scsi-SATA_disk1

    Run this for UEFI booting (for use now or in the future):
    # sgdisk     -n3:1M:+512M -t3:EF00 /dev/disk/by-id/scsi-SATA_disk1

    Run these in all cases:
    # sgdisk     -n9:-8M:0    -t9:BF07 /dev/disk/by-id/scsi-SATA_disk1
    # sgdisk     -n1:0:0      -t1:BF01 /dev/disk/by-id/scsi-SATA_disk1

Always use the long `/dev/disk/by-id/*` aliases with ZFS.  Using the `/dev/sd*` device nodes directly can cause sporadic import failures, especially on systems that have more than one storage pool.

**Hints:**
* `ls -la /dev/disk/by-id` will list the aliases.
* Are you doing this in a virtual machine? If your virtual disk is missing from `/dev/disk/by-id`, use `/dev/vda` if you are using KVM with virtio; otherwise, read the [troubleshooting](https://github.com/rlaager/zfs/wiki/HOWTO-Install-Ubuntu-to-a-Native-ZFS-Root-Filesystem#troubleshooting) section.

2.3  Create the root pool:

    # zpool create -o ashift=12 \
          -O atime=off -O canmount=off -O compression=lz4 -O normalization=formD \
          -O mountpoint=/ -R /mnt \
          rpool /dev/disk/by-id/scsi-SATA_disk1-part1

**Notes:**
* The use of `ashift=12` is recommended here because many drives today have 4KiB (or larger) physical sectors, even though they present 512B logical sectors.  Also, a future replacement drive may have 4KiB physical sectors (in which case `ashift=12` is desirable) or 4KiB logical sectors (in which case `ashift=12` is required).
* Setting `normalization=formD` eliminates some corner cases relating to UTF-8 filename normalization. It also implies `utf8only=on`, which means that only UTF-8 filenames are allowed. If you care to support non-UTF-8 filenames, do not use this option. For a discussion of why requiring UTF-8 filenames may be a bad idea, see [The problems with enforced UTF-8 only filenames](http://utcc.utoronto.ca/~cks/space/blog/linux/ForcedUTF8Filenames).

**Hints:**
* The root pool does not have to be a single disk; it can have a mirror or raidz topology.  In that case, repeat the partitioning commands for all the disks which will be part of the pool. Then, create the pool using `zpool create ... rpool mirror /dev/disk/by-id/scsi-SATA_disk1-part1 /dev/disk/by-id/scsi-SATA_disk2-part1` (or replace `mirror` with `raidz`, `raidz2`, or `raidz3` and list the partitions from additional disks). Later, install GRUB to all the disks. This is trivial for MBR booting; the UEFI equivalent is currently left as an exercise for the reader.
* The pool name is arbitrary.  On systems that can automatically install to ZFS, the root pool is named `rpool` by default.  If you work with multiple systems, it might be wise to use `hostname`, `hostname0`, or `hostname-1` instead.

## Step 3: System Installation

3.1  Create a filesystem dataset to act as a container:

    # zfs create -o canmount=off -o mountpoint=none rpool/ROOT

On Solaris systems, the root filesystem is cloned and the suffix is incremented for major system changes through `pkg image-update` or `beadm`. Similar functionality for APT is possible but currently unimplemented. Even without such a tool, it can still be used for manually created clones.

3.2  Create a filesystem dataset for the root filesystem of the Ubuntu system:

    # zfs create -o canmount=noauto -o mountpoint=/ rpool/ROOT/ubuntu
    # zfs mount rpool/ROOT/ubuntu

With ZFS, it is not normally necessary to use a mount command (either `mount` or `zfs mount`). This situation is an exception because of `canmount=noauto`.

3.3  Create datasets:

    # zfs create                 -o setuid=off              rpool/home
    # zfs create -o mountpoint=/root                        rpool/home/root
    # zfs create -o canmount=off -o setuid=off  -o exec=off rpool/var
    # zfs create -o com.sun:auto-snapshot=false             rpool/var/cache
    # zfs create                                            rpool/var/log
    # zfs create                                            rpool/var/spool
    # zfs create -o com.sun:auto-snapshot=false -o exec=on  rpool/var/tmp

    If you use /srv on this system:
    # zfs create                                            rpool/srv

    If this system will have games installed:
    # zfs create                                            rpool/var/games

    If this system will store local email in /var/mail:
    # zfs create                                            rpool/var/mail

    If this system will use NFS (locking):
    # zfs create -o com.sun:auto-snapshot=false \
                 -o mountpoint=/var/lib/nfs                 rpool/var/nfs

The primary goal of this dataset layout is to separate the OS (at `rpool/ROOT/ubuntu`) from user data. This allows the root filesystem to be rolled back without rolling back user data such as logs (in `/var/log`). This will be especially important if/when a `beadm` or similar utility is integrated. Since we are creating multiple datasets anyway, it is trivial to add some restrictions (for extra security) at the same time. The `com.sun.auto-snapshot` setting is used by some ZFS snapshot utilities to exclude transient data.

3.4  Install the minimal system:

    # chmod 1777 /mnt/var/tmp
    # debootstrap xenial /mnt
    # zfs set devices=off rpool

The `debootstrap` command leaves the new system in an unconfigured state.  An alternative to using `debootstrap` is to copy the entirety of a working Ubuntu system into the new ZFS root.

## Step 4: System Configuration

4.1  Configure the hostname (change `HOSTNAME` to the desired hostname).

    # echo HOSTNAME > /mnt/etc/hostname

    # vi /mnt/etc/hosts
    Add a line:
    127.0.1.1       HOSTNAME
    or if the system has a real name in DNS:
    127.0.1.1       FQDN HOSTNAME

**Hint:** Use `nano` if you find `vi` confusing.

4.2  Configure the network interface:

    Find the interface name:
    # ifconfig -a

    # vi /mnt/etc/network/interfaces.d/NAME
    auto NAME
    iface NAME inet dhcp

Customize this file if the system is not a DHCP client.

4.3  Bind the virtual filesystems from the LiveCD environment to the new system and `chroot` into it:

    # mount --rbind /dev  /mnt/dev
    # mount --rbind /proc /mnt/proc
    # mount --rbind /sys  /mnt/sys
    # chroot /mnt /bin/bash --login

**Note:** This is using `--rbind`, not `--bind`.

4.4 Configure a basic system environment:

    # locale-gen en_US.UTF-8

Even if you prefer a non-English system language, always ensure that `en_US.UTF-8` is available.

    # echo 'LANG="en_US.UTF-8"' > /etc/default/locale

    # dpkg-reconfigure tzdata

    # vi /etc/apt/sources.list
    deb http://archive.ubuntu.com/ubuntu xenial main universe
    deb-src http://archive.ubuntu.com/ubuntu xenial main universe

    deb http://security.ubuntu.com/ubuntu xenial-security main universe
    deb-src http://security.ubuntu.com/ubuntu xenial-security main universe

    deb http://archive.ubuntu.com/ubuntu xenial-updates main universe
    deb-src http://archive.ubuntu.com/ubuntu xenial-updates main universe

    # ln -s /proc/self/mounts /etc/mtab
    # apt update
    # apt install --yes ubuntu-minimal

4.5  Install ZFS in the chroot environment for the new system:

    # apt install --yes --no-install-recommends linux-image-generic
    # apt install --yes zfs-initramfs

4.6  Install GRUB

Choose one of the following options:

4.6a  Install GRUB for legacy (MBR) booting

    # apt install --yes grub-pc

4.6b  Install GRUB for UEFI booting

    # apt install dosfstools
    # mkdosfs -F 32 -n EFI /dev/disk/by-id/scsi-SATA_disk1-part3
    # mkdir /boot/efi
    # echo PARTUUID=$(blkid -s PARTUUID -o value \
          /dev/disk/by-id/scsi-SATA_disk1-part3) \
          /boot/efi vfat defaults 0 1 >> /etc/fstab
    # mount /boot/efi
    # apt install --yes grub-efi-amd64

4.7  Setup system groups:

    # addgroup --system lpadmin
    # addgroup --system sambashare

4.8  Set a root password

    # passwd

## Step 5: GRUB Installation

5.1  Verify that the ZFS root filesystem is recognized:

    # grub-probe /
    zfs

5.2  Refresh the initrd files:

    # update-initramfs -c -k all
    update-initramfs: Generating /boot/initrd.img-4.4.0-21-generic

5.3  Optional (but highly recommended): Make debugging GRUB easier:

    # vi /etc/default/grub
    Comment out: GRUB_HIDDEN_TIMEOUT=0
    Remove quiet and splash from: GRUB_CMDLINE_LINUX_DEFAULT
    Uncomment: GRUB_TERMINAL=console
    Save and quit.

Later, once the system has rebooted twice and you are sure everything is working, you can undo these changes, if desired.

5.4  Update the boot configuration:

    # update-grub
    Generating grub configuration file ...
    Found linux image: /boot/vmlinuz-4.4.0-21-generic
    Found initrd image: /boot/initrd.img-4.4.0-21-generic
    done

5.5  Install the boot loader

5.5a  For legacy (MBR) booting, install GRUB to the MBR:

    # grub-install /dev/disk/by-id/scsi-SATA_disk1
    Installing for i386-pc platform.
    Installation finished. No error reported.

Do not reboot the computer until you get exactly that result message. Note that you are installing GRUB to the whole disk, not a partition.

If you are creating a mirror, repeat the grub-install command for each disk in the pool.

5.5b  For UEFI booting, install GRUB:

    # grub-install --target=x86_64-efi --efi-directory=/boot/efi \
          --bootloader-id=ubuntu --recheck --no-floppy

5.6  Verify that the ZFS module is installed:

    # ls /boot/grub/*/zfs.mod

## Step 6: First Boot

6.1  Snapshot the initial installation:

    # zfs snapshot rpool/ROOT/ubuntu@install

In the future, you will likely want to take snapshots before each upgrade, and remove old snapshots (including this one) at some point to save space.

6.2  Exit from the `chroot` environment back to the LiveCD environment:

    # exit

6.3  Run these commands in the LiveCD environment to unmount all filesystems:

    # mount | grep -v zfs | tac | awk '/\/mnt/ {print $3}' | xargs -i{} umount -lf {}
    # zpool export rpool

6.4  Reboot:

    # reboot

6.5  Wait for the newly installed system to boot normally. Login as root.

6.6  Create a user account:

Choose one of the following options:

6.6a  Create an unencrypted (regular) home directory:

    # zfs create rpool/home/YOURUSERNAME
    # adduser YOURUSERNAME
    # cp -a /etc/skel/.[!.]* /home/YOURUSERNAME
    # chown -R YOURUSERNAME:YOURUSERNAME /home/YOURUSERNAME

6.6b  Create an encrypted home directory:

    # apt install ecryptfs-utils

    # zfs create -o compression=off -o mountpoint=/home/.ecryptfs/YOURUSERNAME \
          rpool/home/temp-YOURUSERNAME
    # adduser --encrypt-home YOURUSERNAME
    # zfs rename rpool/home/temp-YOURUSERNAME rpool/home/YOURUSERNAME

The temporary name for the dataset is required to work-around [a bug in ecryptfs-setup-private](https://bugs.launchpad.net/ubuntu/+source/ecryptfs-utils/+bug/1574174).  Otherwise, it will fail with an error saying the home directory is already mounted; that check is not specific enough in the pattern it uses.

**Note:** Automatically mounted snapshots (i.e. the `.zfs/snapshots` directory) will not work through eCryptfs.  You can do another eCryptfs mount manually if you need to access files in a snapshot.  A script to automate the mounting should be possible, but has not yet been implemented.

6.7  Add your user account to the default set of groups for an administrator:

    # usermod -a -G adm,cdrom,dip,lpadmin,plugdev,sambashare,sudo YOURUSERNAME

## Step 7: Configure Swap

7.1  Create a volume dataset (zvol) for use as a swap device:

    # zfs create -V 4G -b $(getconf PAGESIZE) -o compression=zle \
          -o logbias=throughput -o sync=always \
          -o primarycache=metadata -o secondarycache=none \
          -o com.sun:auto-snapshot=false rpool/swap

You can adjust the size (the `4G` part) to your needs.

The compression algorithm is set to `zle` because it is the cheapest available algorithm.  As this guide recommends `ashift=12` (4 kiB blocks on disk), the common case of a 4 kiB page size means that no compression algorithm can reduce I/O.  The exception is all-zero pages, which are dropped by ZFS; but some form of compression has to be enabled to get this behavior.

7.2  Configure the swap device:

Choose one of the following options.  If you are going to do an encrypted home directory later, you should use encrypted swap.

7.2a  Create an unencrypted (regular) swap device:

**Caution**: Always use long `/dev/zvol` aliases in configuration files. Never use a short `/dev/zdX` device name.

    # mkswap -f /dev/zvol/rpool/swap
    # echo /dev/zvol/rpool/swap none swap defaults 0 0 >> /etc/fstab

7.2b  Create an encrypted swap device:

    # echo cryptswap1 /dev/zvol/rpool/swap /dev/urandom \
          swap,cipher=aes-xts-plain64:sha256,size=256 >> /etc/crypttab
    # systemctl daemon-reload
    # systemctl start systemd-cryptsetup@cryptswap1.service
    # echo /dev/mapper/cryptswap1 none swap defaults 0 0 >> /etc/fstab

7.3  Enable the swap device:

    # swapon -av

## Step 8: Full Software Installation

8.1  Upgrade the minimal system:

    # apt dist-upgrade --yes

8.2  Install a regular set of software:

Choose one of the following options:

8.2a  Install a command-line environment only:

    # apt install --yes ubuntu-standard

8.2b  Install a full GUI environment:

    # apt install --yes ubuntu-desktop

**Hint**: If you are installing a full GUI environment, you will likely want to manage your network with NetworkManager. In that case, `rm /etc/network/interfaces.d/eth0`.

8.3  Optional: Disable log compression:

As `/var/log` is already compressed by ZFS, logrotate’s compression is going to burn CPU and disk I/O for (in most cases) very little gain.  Also, if you are making snapshots of `/var/log`, logrotate’s compression will actually waste space, as the uncompressed data will live on in the snapshot.  You can edit the files in `/etc/logrotate.d` by hand to comment out `compress`, or use this loop (copy-and-paste highly recommended):

    # for file in /etc/logrotate.d/* ; do
        if grep -Eq "(^|[^#y])compress" "$file" ; then
            sed -i -r "s/(^|[^#y])(compress)/\1#\2/" "$file"
        fi
    done

8.4  Reboot:

    # reboot

### Step 9: Final Cleanup

9.1  Wait for the system to boot normally. Login using the account you created. Ensure the system (including networking) works normally.

9.2  Optional: Delete the snapshot of the initial installation:

    $ sudo zfs destroy rpool/ROOT/ubuntu@install

9.3  Optional: Disable the root password

    $ sudo usermod -p '*' root

9.4  Optional (not recommended):

If you prefer the graphical boot process, you can re-enable it now. It will make debugging boot problems more difficult, though.

    $ sudo vi /etc/default/grub
    Uncomment GRUB_HIDDEN_TIMEOUT=0
    Add quiet and splash to GRUB_CMDLINE_LINUX_DEFAULT
    Comment out GRUB_TERMINAL=console
    Save and quit.

    $ sudo update-grub

## Troubleshooting

### MPT2SAS

Most problem reports for this tutorial involve `mpt2sas` hardware that does slow asynchronous drive initialization, like some IBM M1015 or OEM-branded cards that have been flashed to the reference LSI firmware.

The basic problem is that disks on these controllers are not visible to the Linux kernel until after the regular system is started, and ZoL does not hotplug pool members.  See https://github.com/zfsonlinux/zfs/issues/330.

Most LSI cards are perfectly compatible with ZoL. If your card has this glitch, try setting rootdelay=X in GRUB_CMDLINE_LINUX. The system will wait up to X seconds for all drives to appear before importing the pool.

### Areca

Systems that require the `arcsas` blob driver should add it to the `/etc/initramfs-tools/modules` file and run `update-initramfs -c -k all`.

Upgrade or downgrade the Areca driver if something like `RIP: 0010:[<ffffffff8101b316>]  [<ffffffff8101b316>] native_read_tsc+0x6/0x20` appears anywhere in kernel log.  ZoL is unstable on systems that emit this error message.

### VMware

* Set `disk.EnableUUID = "TRUE"` in the vmx file or vsphere configuration.  Doing this ensures that `/dev/disk` aliases are created in the guest.

### QEMU/KVM/XEN

Set a unique serial number on each virtual disk (e.g.: `-drive if=none,id=disk1,file=disk1.qcow2,serial=1234567890`).

To be able to use UEFI in guests (instead of only BIOS booting):

    $ sudo apt install ovmf
    $ sudo vi /etc/libvirt/qemu.conf
    Uncomment this line:
    nvram = [ "/usr/share/OVMF/OVMF_CODE.fd:/usr/share/OVMF/OVMF_VARS.fd" ]
    $ sudo service libvirt-bin restart
